In this folio, we see the scene that unfolds after Khan Kilan, an officer in the Mughal army under Akbar, is stabbed by a Rajput warrior in 1572.
Khan Kilan and the Mughals were on the last leg of their journey towards Sirohi,
a Rajput stronghold in Western India near the border of Rajasthan and Gujarat.
They had set up camp in the nearby town of Bhadrajan
where they would rest before attempting to move upon Sirohi and conquer it.
It is here where Khan Kilan first makes contact with the Rajput warriors,
who had cleverly disguised themselves as simple messengers delivering a notice to the Mughal army.
As the Rajputs were getting ready to depart, Khan Kilan called them close to say farewell
when one of the Rajput’s took their opportunity to strike, as described by Abu’l Fazl:
“One of these daring and furious men struck a blow with his dagger between the Khan Kalan’s collar-bone
so that the point came out below the shoulder-blade to the extent of three finger-breadths.
Bahadur K. Turbati, one of his servants ran and felled the Rajput to the ground.
Sadiq Khan and Muhammad Quli Khan acted with promptitude and killed him.”
After hearing of the attack on Khan Kilan, Akbar took it upon himself to join the army in order to complete the objective swiftly and efficiently.
In the end, this move by the Rajput’s only angered the Mughals who soon after marched on Sirohi and conquered the city in just four days.
The actions taken by the Rajput’s were likely a move of desperation
as they were warned of the incoming Mughals who, lead by Akbar, had the upper hand in military combat.
Within the painting, we can see the chaotic atmosphere that was caused by the attack on the Mughal officer.
The scene is like something out of a movie where soldiers have their weapons drawn and readied.
People are clutching at each others clothing, ready to fight.
It is likely that in the commotion there was confusion and uncertainty about who the attackers were leaving everybody en garde.
In the foreground we see two men valiantly riding their elephant into the battle.
The elephants in this painting not only replicate the significance of elephants in Mughal and Indian culture in general but are also used to give context to the scene.
In the time of Akbar, elephants were akin to modern day tanks in that they were used as sturdy siege weapons that imposed on the enemy.
This comparison with tanks elicits feelings of destruction and war in the viewer.
The painter Kesav Khord uses these characteristics to establish the intensity of the battle.
Not just their presence but their positioning and stance place emphasis on the fighting and general hostility.
The riders of the elephants ride with their weapons readied to further drive the emotion of the painting.
This provides further context that this attack on Sirohi was not a minor military exercise, but an important objective for control of the area.